## Syntax Overview{#sec:syntax_overview}

Before describing the details of the language, we provide a few general
notes about the syntax. In the syntax notations used below, syntactic
categories are indicated by monospace font. Grammar productions
enclosed in parenthesis ('( )') indicate a set of choices in which a
vertical bar ('|') is used to separate alternatives in the syntax rules
or ' ..' is used to describe a range (e.g. ('A'..'Z')). Any characters
in single quotes describe concrete syntax: (e.g.: '+', '-', '=&gt;',
'''). Note that the last example is the concrete syntax for a single
quote. Examples of grammar fragments are also written in the monospace
font. Sometimes one of the following characters is used at the
beginning of a rule as a shorthand for choosing among several
alternatives: 1) The '\*' character indicates repetition (zero or more
occurrences) and '+' indicates required repetition (1 or more
occurrences). 2) A '?' character indicates that the preceding token is
optional.

AGREE is built on top of the AADL 2.0 architecture description language.
The AGREE formulas are found in an AADL *annex*, which extends the
grammar of AADL. Generally, the annex follows the conventions of AADL in
terms of lexical elements and types with some small deviations (which
are noted). AGREE operates over a relatively small fragment of the AADL
syntax. Thus familiarity with the entire AADL language is not required.
We will build up the language starting from the smallest fragments. A
cursory overview of the AADL declarations is provided in Appendix B.

AADL describes the interface of a component in a *component type*. A
*component type* contains a list of *features*, which are the inputs and
outputs of a component, and possibly a list of AADL properties. A
*component implementation* is used to describe a specific instance of a
*component type*. A *component implementation* contains a list of
subcomponents and list of connections that occur between its
subcomponents and features.

For example, one may decide to create a component type for a car which
contains features describing its throttle, speed, and direction. A car
component may have many implementations (like a 2006 Toyota Camry, or a
McLaren 650s). Different implementations may contain different
electronic components, actuators, etc.

The syntax for a component's contract exists in an AGREE annex placed
inside of the *component type*. AGREE syntax can also be placed inside
of annexes in a *component implementation* or an AADL Package. Syntax
placed in an annex in an AADL Package can be used to create libraries
that can be referenced by other components.
