Expressions{#sec:expressions}
-----------

A simplified description of the set of expressions for AGREE is
presented below.

~~~
RelateOp::=
   '<' | '<=' | '>' | '>=' | '=' | '<>' | '!=';

QID::= ID '::' ID ;

NestedDotID ::= ID ('.' NestedDotID)? ;

Literal :: = Boolean_literal | Integer_literal | Real_literal ;

Expr ::= Literal
    | ID
    | QID
    | NestedDotId
    | ID '(' Expr_List ')'
    | 'pre' '(' Expr ')'
    | 'prev' '(' Expr ',' Expr ')'
    | 'event' '(' NestedDotID ')'
    | 'floor' '(' Expr ')'
    | 'real' '(' Expr ')'
    | 'Get_Property' '(' Expr ',' AADL_Property ')'
    | 'this' ('.' NestedDotId)?
    | '(' Expr ')'
    | RecordUpdateExpr
    | ('-' | 'not') Expr
    | Expr ('+' | '-' | '\*' | '/' | 'div'| 'mod') Expr
    | Expr RelateOp Expr
    | Expr ('and' | 'or' ) Expr
    | Expr ('->' | '=>' | '<=>' ) Expr
    | 'if' Expr 'then' Expr 'else' Expr ;

Expr_List ::= Expr ',' Expr_List | Expr ;
~~~

The order of precedence (from lowest to highest) is as follows:

> -&gt;\
> =&gt;\
> &lt;=&gt;\
> or\
> and\
> &lt; | &lt;= | &gt; | &gt;= | = | &lt;&gt; |!=\
> + | -\
> \* | / | div | mod\
> unary minus | not\
> if then else\
> prev | next | Get\_Property\
> ID | QID | NestedDotID | Literal | pre | this | ()

Therefore, `x + if y then a else b * prev(z.f - 1, 0)` would be parsed as
follows:

~~~
x + (if y then a else (b * (prev((z.f) – 1, 0))))
~~~

The meaning of the arithmetic, relational, and Boolean operators is
straightforward. If/then/else is an *expression,* not a *statement*; it
behaves like the `?` operator in Java. So, users can write:

~~~
x = if (b) then y else z ;
~~~

Expressions reason about the current state or past states of variables
and can reference variables defined in equation statements or other
identifiers in the AADL model. In the rest of this section, we describe
different types of expressions in the order they are listed as
alternatives to the grammar rule for Expr.

### ID Expressions

ID expressions are used to reference different AADL objects as well as
AGREE variables and constants. Constants or variables must be defined
locally (in the AGREE annex block or the enclosing definition), and they
can be referred to by a single identifier ID.

### Enumerator Expressions{#sec:enumerator_expressions}

Enumerator expressions are ID expressions referencing an enumerator
literal.  However, the syntax differs between enumerations defined in AADL
and enumerations defined in AGREE.  For AGREE enumerations, enumerator
expressions are merely ID expressions naming enumerator values.  Using the
types defined in [Enumeration Types](03.04-Types.html#sec:enumeration_types)
the use of `spade`, `heart`, `club`, and `diamond` as identifiers are
all valid AGREE enumeration expressions.

For AADL enumerations a special syntax is required.  The `enum`
keyword followed by the enumeration type and enumerator name is used as
follows:

~~~
enum(Package::Color, Red)
~~~

### NestedDotID (Field) Expressions

A NestedDotID expression can have dots in between ID expressions, e.g.,
`food.bar.biz`. It can be used to refer to record types or variables of a
subcomponent. For example, one could use the NestedDotID expression
foo.bar to reference the input, output, or equation variable `bar` of
subcomponent `foo` within the implementation of some AADL component. A
NestedDotID expression can also be used for inputs and outputs that are
of record type: if `x` is a record type containing field `y`, then the
notation `x.y` is used.

### Node Call Expressions

A node call expression is an ID of a defined node followed by
parenthesis. If the node is defined in an AADL Package, then the ID
should be the AADL Package name followed by a dot (.) and then the node
name.

### Linearization Call Expressions

A Linearization Call Expression is an ID of a defined linearization
expression followed by parenthesis. If the linearization expression is
defined in an AADL Package, then the ID should be the AADL Package name
followed by a dot (.) and then the ID for the expression. For the
example linearization expression provided in
[Linearization Definitions](03.06-Statements.html#sec:linearization_definitions),
its ID "sq" can be used in other expressions like a non-recursive, pure
function call. The following lemma statement provides one such example.

~~~
eq y : real;

lemma "sq() range positive" : sq(y) <= -0.10;
~~~

### Stream (Previous Value and Arrow) Expressions 

**Arrow Expression**. The arrow expression evaluates to the value of the
expression of the left hand side of the arrow on the initial step.
Otherwise it evaluates to the value of the expression on the right hand
side of the arrow. The arrow expression is used with the pre expression
to reason about past values of variables. For example, we can define a
variable in an AGREE contract that starts at zero and increments by one
each step in time using an equation statement:

~~~
eq count: int = 0 -> pre(count) + 1;
~~~

**Previous Value Expression**. A previous value expression evaluates to
the value of its argument on the previous time frame. It should that it
be guarded by an arrow expressions as its value is undefined on the
initial step.

The previous value expression defines an initialized stream. So, if we
write:

~~~
eq x : int = prev(y + 1, 0);
~~~

In the initial instant, `x` is equal to 0. In all subsequent instants, `x`
is equal to the previous value of `y + 1`. If we examine the evolution of `x`
and `y` over a time window of ten steps, it is relatively straightforward
to see.

  ------------------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- --------
  **Time Instant **   **1**   **2**   **3**   **4**   **5**   **6**   **7**   **8**   **9**   **10**
  **y**               4       5       8       7       3       12      6       9       1       3
  **y+1**             5       6       9       8       4       13      7       10      2       4
  **x**               0       5       6       9       8       4       13      7       10      2
  ------------------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- --------

The arrow (`->`) operator is the stream initialization operator. Given
an expression `x -> y`, in the initial instant in time, the value is
equal to `x`. In all subsequent instants, it is equal to `y`. So, suppose we
have:

~~~
eq x : bool = (false -> a);
~~~

Then, in the first instant in time, `x` will be assigned "false" and in
every other instant in time, it will be assigned "a".

**Note: A common mistake is to mis-type `->` for `=>` (and
vice-versa). This will often cause your model to return incorrect
results. Please check for this error.**

The `=>` operator is the implication operator: if you write:

~~~
a => b
~~~

then `a` and `b` are expected to be Boolean expressions and the meaning of
the operator is equivalent to `(not a) or b`. So, writing:

~~~
x = (false => a)
~~~

Will assign `x` to true in all time instants.

The pre expression is an *uninitialized* pre expression. Its value is
*undefined* in the initial instant. This expression is expected to be
used in combination with the arrow expression; this can yield
expressions that are, on occasional, more terse than using the prev
expression. However, the following equivalence always holds for
arbitrary expressions `x` and `y`:

~~~
prev(x, y) <=> (y -> pre(x))
~~~

For novice users, we recommend using the initialized prev expression as
it is less error prone than the `->` pre combination.

### Event Expressions

An event expression is a special predicate that is used to reason about
AADL event data ports. For an input event data port, its semantics are
such that it evaluates to true if a value is *present* on the event port
and false otherwise. For an output event data port, its semantics are
such that it evaluates true if data is being sent on the port and false
otherwise.

### Floor and Real Expressions

A floor expression takes an expression of type *real* as an argument and
returns an *int* equal to the floor of the number.

A real expression takes an expression of type *int* as argument and
returns a *real* equal to its value.

### Get Property Expressions

A get property expression allows a user to reason about values of AADL
properties in the model. The first argument is the relative path to an
AADL component in the instance model or 'this' if the property exists in
the component in which get property statement lives. The second argument
is the name of the AADL property.

### Unary Minus and Not Expressions

An Unary Minus expression is used to negate integer or real valued
expressions.

A Not Expression is used to negate boolean valued expressions.

### Record Expressions{#sec:record_expressions}

In AGREE a record type is either an AADL Data Type
Implementation containing Data subcomponents or may be defined directly
in the AGREE annex as follows:

~~~
type foo = struct {a : bool, b : int};

eq bar : foo;
~~~

A record expression constructs a value that may be assigned to a variable
of record type.

~~~
eq bar2 : foo = foo { a = true; b = 6 };
~~~

Record Update Expression are assignments to all or a specific field of a
record type variable. For example, `bar2 {a := false}` is a valid Record
Update Expression, given
definition for type `foo` and variable `bar2` as above.

The record update expression expects an expression of record type on the
left hand side of the curly braces. It returns the same record as the
left hand side expression except with its member IDs set to the value of
the expression on the right hand side of the `:=`;

### Arithmetic Operations

Arithmetic operations must be performed on expressions of the same type.
They follow the standard order of precedence. Note that AGREE will give
a warning if you write an expression that is not linear. Some theorem
provers do not reason about non-linear expressions. Non-linear integer
arithmetic is undecidable and most theorem provers do not use a
decidable decision procedure for non-linear real arithmetic. So it is
recommended that you only use linear expressions.

### Relation Expressions

Relation expressions can be performed on integers or reals, but not a
combination of both. Equality can be used on Booleans as well.

### Boolean Expressions

Boolean expressions have the standard associative properties and order
of precedence.

